STRAVA

A web application for visualizing and analyzing single cell RNA-seq data.

https://github.com/eyeloveotters/scRNA-seq-shiny-app

The purpose of the Single-cell Transcriptomics RNA Analytical Visualization Application (STRAVA) is to is to allow researchers to interact with single-cell transcriptomic data through differential expression statistical tests and responsive visualizations in real-time. This type of interaction allows both wet-lab and dry-lab researchers to identify and interpret points of heterogeneity from single-cell transcriptomic measurements. This app was created within R Studio’s Shiny framework, and all data pre-processing, analysis, differential expression testing, and visualization steps were conducted using Seurat. Seurat is an R package designed for quality control, analysis, and exploration of single-cell RNA-seq data. The original RNA-seq data set is structured as a molecular identified (UMI) count matrix of Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMC). This data set is available free of charge from 10X Genomics, and contains 2,700 single cells that were sequenced on the Illumina NextSeq500 high throughput sequencer, which has since been discontinued and replaced by the Illumina NextSeq 550. 

The raw data set was processed and analyzed in R Studio before being uploaded into the web app. It is possible to upload a raw count data set that can be processed and analyzed within the app. Future versions will allow for this capability. However, this step was skipped for brevity of demonstrating the capabilities of the app during presentations. The core domains of data analysis prior to app presentation include quality control and pre-processing, dimension reduction, clustering, and differential expression. After conducting these steps using Seurat’s standard workflow, the data was uploaded into the app. The standard workflow for clustering and identification includes data scaling, principal component analysis, and UMAP before constructing a Shared Nearest Neighbor (SNN) Graph and cell identification.

There are seven tabs within the app, each of which contains an analytical or visual feature. The first is differential expression testing. In this tab, the user is allowed to selection two PBMC types for comparison. The default DE analysis is used using a nonparametric Wilcoxan Rank Sum test, but a drop-down menu input allows for the selection of many other types of statistical tests. By default, the page displays the top 10 genes ranked by Wilcoxan p-value. Changing the type of statistical test interactively changes the top 10 genes listed on the screen ranked by smallest p-value. This must be kept in mind, as the output generally shows p-values of 0 due to the extremely small p-values. Users also have the option to search for genes of interest to display in the data set, increase the number of genes displayed, and save the table output to a CSV formatted data set for further analysis using preferred statistical packages.

The next tab contains a dimension plot showing PBMC cell type clusters after the UMAP step of Seurat’s standard workflow. Cells shown here were identified by researchers, and they were named for the purposes of demonstration. The SNN graph was made interactive using Plotly, and users are allowed and encouraged to explore the graph to extract further insights. The next tab contains feature plots where users can select a gene and see the plot illuminate in areas with cells expressing the selected gene. Feature plots were also made interactive using Plotly. The next tab contains layers of heat maps, with 6 genes pre-selected for the visualization. Users are able to subtract and add any numbers to genes for side by side comparison interactively. Following, the Violin Plots tab shows violin plots for each identified cell type, and users can search for gene they would like displayed in the main panel. The next tab contains the same functionality as the Violin Plots page but visualized using Ridge Plots. Finally, the Dot Plot tab allows for multiple gene selection. Each gene selected will appear as a feature on the Dot Plot in the main panel. The default genes displayed can also be removed to make room for interests of the researcher.

Although a lot of progress has been made on STRAVA, this is not yet a complete project. In the future, the app will allow for the uploading of unique data sets meeting specified minimal criteria for scRNA transcriptomic data. This will be a very complicated step as error handling will need to be excessive and give good user output to allow for correction and compliance. Next, the standardized workflow will be performed within the app so researchers will not have to process and analyze UMI data themselves. Although many of the analytical steps are standard, there will need to be room for user input into Quality Control metrics used. There will also be options for filtering out unwanted cells in DE testing and analysis. Finally, the DE data download feature will need to include a plethora of optional data set formats for increased statistical software compatibility for post-analysis purposes. With these steps in mind, significant progress has been made and the app is functional as STRAVA version 1.0. STRAVA is currently hosted at GitHub, and the app will be hosted live on shinyapps.io following future iterations.
